OK.
My name is Richard Brown, and I'm senior vice
president of planning for the Woodlands
Corporation. It's almost 1991, and I've spent the
last 16 years here full time overseeing the real
estate portfolio of Mitchell from the planning
strategy and implementation phase, most of that
time being spent on the new town called the
Woodlands. I came here with a career that included
25 years of running my own consulting
professional firm of planners, engineers, and
architects, which had, when I left, five offices,
New York, New Jersey, Maryland, Atlanta,
Georgia, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. And we
specialized in a broad spectrum of professional
services, but my real love was new community
planning and development. I started my career in
the early 50s as a professional engineer,
broadening into urban planning and
architecture, and became a consultant to many
communities, both for their planning boards and
governing bodies, as well as servicing the real
estate development industry in a wide variety of
projects from industrial development. How did
you get into the new community concept or
framework of things? I was retained by the Rouse
Company to do the planning and engineering on a
regional shopping mall in Willowbrook, New
Jersey, called Willowbrook in Wayne, New Jersey.
And in the process of that project, they announced
to me that they had bought 11,000 acres in Maryland
between Baltimore and Washington to do a new city,
and wondered if I would come down and take a look at
what they thought they wanted to do, since up to
that point, they were regional moral developers.
But Jim Rouse had an idea that suburban sprawl
communities were not the best way to develop this
nation. new communities were. And I went down
there in 1965. Excuse me, how would you define a new
community from that framework then or now, if
there's any difference? Well, I think up until
then and still prevailing today, the development
industry are really geared up to be what I call
shelter builders. They build houses, and your
Sunday real estate section is full of houses. And
they sell living rooms and ceiling fans and back
decks. And the thrust really is the shelter
they're selling. There's very few people who are
community builders. A community builder not only
provides a shelter, but he takes on the
responsibility of providing a high quality of
life for those residents to encompass all
opportunities that are possible. to create an
environment where people can live good lives and
cover a broad cross-section of housing. Most
subdivisions and developments are pretty
monolithic in their price structure. New
community attempts to have housing for the very
poor, the very rich, and everybody in between in
accordance with some economic demographic
profile so that you have the vibrant mixture of
people. And that's what new communities do. try to
provide the retail and employment components of
life also in the project. And that's part of the
inception of the whole community plan? The
conception of the plan is that you shouldn't have
to spend one or two hours a day out of your life
commuting to and from work. It would be great if you
could get there in two to three minutes, which is
the way I've lived for the last 30 years. Because
I've lived in new towns since the early 60s. And I
guess I've lost touch with what the real world is
like. It's all right. That's all right. All right.
So you were developing, you had become
affiliated, I guess, with the new community town
concept. Yeah, the Rouse Company asked me to come
down, and after a few days of discussions, I was put
in charge of, taking the conceptual plans and
doing the hard line planning, the engineering,
the county approvals that were necessary, take
the bids, get the development built for the
opening. So I was headed for that. That was a
tremendous career. Yeah, it was a wonderful
experience. How old were you then, roughly? I was
in my, I guess, early 40s or late 30s.
It was a wonderful experience to start with a clean
slate and say, you know, where do the roads go?
Where should the neighborhoods be? What is the
fabric of community? What kind of an
infrastructure should you have from the physical
side as well as the social side? Can we take the
experiences we've had and weave together a
community that serves its people? I could mention
that for a number of years I was mayor of a town in New
Jersey undergoing very rapid growth. We're
getting 3,000 building permits a year. And I knew
all the problems of trying to provide libraries
and recreation and public works expansions and
services for a growing population. That was a
great piece of experience. I think that was
incredible. It really was. I bet very few
architects have had that side. That's correct. So
that was an in-depth. training session to help
prepare me for new community development work,
which is really what I love to do. And then how did
the Texas Connection develop? After we got
Columbia, Maryland open, the Routes Company had
wanted me to stay on, but I had my own company, as I
mentioned. I had taken a sabbatical for a year and a
half to get Columbia open, so I said no. We expanded
our activity in the new community field, and I
think we did six or seven of the 12 or 13 HUD
community projects. Flower Man was one. St.
Charles was another.
Ganonda was a third. We did Peachtree City, but at
the last minute, they decided to stay private. And
of course, we did that. That was in Georgia. That
was in Atlanta. Yeah, southwest of Atlanta.
That's still doing very nicely now. But the other
HUD communities didn't make it, basically. No,
they didn't make it for predetermined reasons.
They had weak, inexperienced sponsors, not
enough staying power financially. They were in
poor locations where the markets were not strong.
To build it in town, you need a great location. You
need to be on Interstate Highway, which the
Williams did. You need to be near a major airport,
which it is. You need to be near an urban center
that's expanding and has dynamic... vitality
which houston does and so all the things will work
you need a patient strong sponsor that can stand
the deep investments that it takes the first 10
years before you turn profitable a few people are
committed to do that yeah they're all looking for a
quick return every quarter yeah the bank wants you
to borrow the money and return it that same year it
takes a long time to develop these projects, it's
nothing to think in terms of 20, 30, 40 years. But
anyway, George Mitchell came to Columbia,
Maryland, and visited me at my office there. I was
pretty well known. I guess that was in 68, 69. and
invited me down here to take a look at this
property. I wonder who led him to you. Do you know,
or other than just your reputation? No, I think it
was the Columbia. Columbia had the reputation. It
was the first new town on the East Coast, and when
they came and found out that I had my role in it, and
that I was a consulting firm with an office right
there in the American City building in downtown
Columbia, it was logical to continue. on and was a
good source of potential clients and so forth. So
George then retained my firm to come down and help.
What did you think about his idea, that initial
conversation? Do you remember any aspect of that?
Yeah, I remember him asking me what it took to do a
new town, and I told him it took a whole host of
disciplines, engineers, planners, architects,
economists, market people. and a commitment for
long-term investment and so forth. And he said,
OK. And I'm prepared to do all that. And so I became a
consultant to the project. And just like with the
Routes Company, when that was done, he said, well,
why don't you stay on? And again, I said no and went
away to do Peachtree City for Pipps Land Company,
which I did for a year. including some work in
Florida. But I kept getting phone calls. Why don't
you come back? Why don't you come back? So when
there was a break in major projects, I agreed to
come back for a month and take a look. And at the end
of that 30 days, I decided to stay. Oh, was that
right? This was in the fall of 1974. But now, you had
been here earlier than in 72? Well, I was here in 70,
71, 72 when we did the planning. Then I went away for
two years. Is this basic structure your
conception, pretty much, the layout of the
villages? Well, let me say, to be totally fair,
there was a team of people involved. Robert
Gladstone did the market studies economic
reports which have a strong bearing on what you
build because there's a market there to buy it. We
had McCard here from the University of
Pennsylvania who was an environmentalist who
hammered home the preservation of the forest
concept and the forest preserves, which really is
our signature. And we still respect a lot of what he
said, some of which we had to change.
Nevertheless,
he had a very positive influence. And then William
Pereira, an architect on the West Coast. George
used to say, well, we've got the best from the West
Coast and the best from the East Coast. And Richard
Brown, associate, and he William Carrera got
together, and we had numerous workshops over the
year doing concept planning, master planning.
And we tried a lot of things. We tried linear plans.
We tried historic gridiron patterns. And in the
end, I think the Columbia model proved to be the
most viable, which was a series of residential
villages and a very strong employment corridor
along I-45. Your initial plan, what was the
acreage? Was it 7,000? 17,000. 17,000, yeah. It's
25 now. But it was 17 at that time. When I came back
full time, one of the first things I did was lobby,
pick up that next 8,000 acres all the way out to
2978, which was a major acquisition. But George
became convinced. If we didn't do that, by the way,
we'd be nearing the end of this project by now.
Because we needed that to grow.
So you come back here then in 74.
And that was kind of a tenuous time. Yeah, oil
shortages were coming on and the economy was flat
and it was tough getting going. By energy going up,
they could afford to bridge the gap of deficit
years until the project would turn profitable.
What intrigued you about coming here, say,
instead of going to another project somewhere
else? Well, I think it was, frankly, the biggest
project. I really believed that it had all the
components for success, as I mentioned, on a state
highway near a growing metropolitan area. the
largest in the country at that time, near a major
airport. So those compounds were there. George's
personal commitment to me that this was not a get in
and get out kind of a project. He was going to see it
through. They were going to fund it. And the thing
that appealed to me most of all the sponsors of New
Towns, most of them were either in the real estate
business or some other affiliated business, but
nobody had such a strong main business. I think
Mitchell's energy division, and we used to say,
you know, Mitchell is 80% energy and 20% real
estate. So real estate's very cyclonic. If you're
going into a project that's going to take 30 years,
there's going to be good times, there's going to be
bad times, there's going to be good times, there's
going to be bad times. It's going to go up and down
two or three times a decade. And if that's all you
do, when you hit those troughs, you're in a lot of
trouble. I saw the energy division as the means to
bridge those gaps, where when things are good, we
break it all in. When things get bad, we've got the
staying power. I never would have sold my company,
you know, just to come out of purely real estate
companies. I know they're so flaky. They don't
have the staying power when you hit a recession.
But since it was a minor part of the company's
business, you know, I figured that gave it a
stability that most real estate companies don't
have. It's a very important thing. And people will
admit, if you look back, that if it weren't for
energy, we wouldn't have produced some of the gas.
And then, of course, we had the double whammy in the
mid-'80s, when both energy and real estate went
down, and we had some tough sledding. But now, both
of them up again. I think it's going to work out all
right. I think that... Do you think,
incidentally, that... Right now, it's
comparable in any way, say, to the mid-'70s when
things began to recycle again. You know, the
energy oil went up and building... I like to think
that we've learned something from that and we
aren't going to go... I think they'll find a
solution in the next 6 to 12 months in the Middle
East. It'll be a compromise that will moderate
things back to, I think, where it will stay...
between $20 and $30 a barrel, and maybe $25, where I
think it's a healthy thing for the energy
companies, but not a depressant on the rest of the
world economy. And I think that's very important.
But I think that will happen. And instead of having
the kind of crazy boom they had in the late 70s that
only could foresee a collapse that happened,
hopefully that won't happen again. Now, when NAD
See, I may be jumping your head too far. But in 82,
that's about the time you begin to hit the slide
again in the Woodlands. What are you doing now? I
mean, can you sort of reconstruct that particular
period? You've been in the Boone, and now what
happens is basically through the 80s. Well, we
reduced staff. Our planning department used to be
18. It went back to six. It was a time to tighten
belts and to try to... survive what everybody
said, what you know. Because we know,
historically, it's cyclonic. When things are
bad, they don't stay bad. They will change.
They'll either get worse or they'll get better.
And we knew it would get better. And sure enough, it
did. And the thing that happened, which was very
surprising but very enlightening, as the real
estate market shrunk as far as demand goes in
Houston, so did The development industries
shrink. And the subdivision developers, the
shelter builders, as I said, the people who didn't
build communities, their projects died
illegally. And what happened where the
Newtown-type projects, which the Woodlands fits
the Newtown definition the best, but there are
others that are similar but not quite as complete,
like the King Woods and the First Colonies and the
Copperfields, those planned communities, which
fortunately ring Clear Lake City, ring Houston,
and that's an important point to mention later,
those communities which had been getting between
5 and 7 percent of the market share during the good
times wound up getting 50 to 55 percent of the
market share. So while the pie got smaller, the new
community project share of that pie got bigger and
bigger. So we didn't suffer the total collapse
that the individual subdivision developers saw.
And that was largely because of the builders or
whatever lost their financing, was it, do you
think? That's probably part of it, but also I think
that the marketplace began to understand and
perceive that a new community environment Was it
better protection for their real estate
investment than somebody's bedroom in the
subdivision? Right, somebody's gridiron
bedroom community project that didn't have the
recreation, social, cultural, entertainment,
and employment opportunities where the quality
of life wasn't assured because of the
completeness of the program and the plan. And then
that was traditional Texas, Houston
construction style until the advent of
equipment. across the whole country. And I'm not
trying to compare anything unfavorably, but
Friendswood, I guess, would have been the largest
developer in the south part of town in that style.
Clear Lake City. Clear Lake City, right. Are they
moving more into your style of development now,
you think? No, I don't think so. I think everyone
has their own program.
Our biggest competitor, because the two of us are
the north side of town, their villages are
economically very monolithic. This village, if
you want a price range house, $150,000 to
$200,000, you live in that village. If you want an
$80,000 house, you live in another village. Where
the woodlands, we have the dynamics of a complete
socioeconomic mixed formula for the whole
village. And we get more vitality and reality to
the population that way. And we put 12,000 to
16,000, 18,000 people per village to serve as a
village center. Kingwood just does residential
pods, and they call them villages, but they're
not. We try to have a village center and school
system, short of high school, in each village,
complete parks and pathway systems for each
village, complete variety of housing in each
village. So people are triggered to have a sense of
allegiance and place in the village they live in.
And then we do a village in four to five, six years.
We're done with it, and we're on to another
village, and these people aren't in the
construction mess anymore. And we can take 30
years, and we aren't pestering everybody with 30
years worth of construction activity around
their ears, because we do a village at a time. They
overlap, of course. So you survived the slump,
basically, by, in part, contracting some of your
activities. But also, your share of the pie is
getting larger. And we're talking about 82, 83
more pie, and so forth. What are you doing now in
terms of planning? Is there any kind of
redirection or reconstitution of your thoughts
and directions? Well, only those that I think come
from the maturing of the project.
And I think that... you understand our master plan
we have a 5 000 acre business complex along the i-45
corridor there hasn't been much said about it uh i
don't think if you ask people downtown about the
woodlands they would immediately talk about
housing and that segment of it they think of it as a
business community Yet the Woodlands has 5,000
acre business complex, which makes it one of the
largest master plan business complex in the
southwestern part of the United States. We have a
rail served industrial park at the trade center.
We have a commercial area for light
manufacturing. We have the research forest for
high tech. We have the town center, which will be
the urban core. 5,000 acres will someday have
100,000 jobs and 30, 40 million square feet of
development there, and it will be the hub of a
million people by the year 2000. That million
people is the primary market area of the town
center and the business complex of the Woodlands.
How many of that million will be housed actually in
the Woodlands, let's say? Will that be the
Woodlands? That will all be in the Woodlands.
Okay. Right. and that is the maturing of this
region and that's what we're getting into the
planning of now which you really couldn't think
seriously about until you built up this base of 30
to 50 000 people here now the rest of it starts to
come along and i think by the year 2000 we will have a
business complex the town center particularly
will start to take shape that will be the envy of any
urban center It'll be a satellite city to Houston,
and it will be a downtown in the forest. We'll have
the amenities of culture, and education, and
services, and shopping, and jobs that are in close
proximity to the primary labor force in the area.
And I hope that that will really complete the
spectrum that I consider the Woodlands.
And I think, you know, you don't start off doing
that. That can only come after the population in
the region starts to mature, and we're within a
year or two of reaching those kind of numbers. Now,
the Mall is intrinsic to that. The Mall is one of
those major building blocks or cornerstones of
the town center. A mall will not be viable unless
there's 275 or 325,000 people within the primary
market area. And the arithmetic is now there. So
we're on the verge of being able to start that mall
and bring it on stream in the next probably 24
months. In developing this kind of, I won't call it
an urban complex, but certainly a highly large
population in a small area, What does this do to
your environmental concerns in the woodlands?
How do you manage that? Is there a special plan? In
other words, when you put the mall down in the
woodlands, how do you accommodate that to the
style that you've already developed? Is there
difficulty here? Well, any large project, such as
a mall, requires a lot of earth moving, which of
itself destroys a lot of trees. uh but you have to
have parking lots that enter at the second level
can be two of them all but we will have site planning
and architectural control of the design and
development of this such that we will
re-establish the forest in the parking lots and
around the perimeter of the mall so that it still
reads like the woodlands and not like uh some of
your other yeah that's what that's the only You
know, 90 acres of concrete parking lots, period.
But you've certainly done that with the
commercial buildings, even like your building.
You have to really walk through the trees to find
the building. It's kind of fun. Man is a creature of
the forest, which, you know, it's another
dimension which I think is worth mentioning. When
I started work at Columbia, Maryland, and then
these other new towns started following, there
was a point in time when I think if you added up our
client list, we had over 100,000 acres worth of new
community projects, which potentially could
house a million people. And I said, you know, this
is serious work. If you have the audacity to think
you're going to build an environment for a million
people, you really need to know something about
people. So up until that point, most of the concern
was economics, market share. sewer capacity,
water capacity, highway access, the hardware
issues. Nobody was asking questions about, what
about the user? And I got involved at that point in
personal research into cultural anthropology
and social behavioral science in order to
understand better what communities were all
about. I took eight trips to Europe and studied
various countries, their human settlements,
their villages, their towns. I wrote to Robert
Ardrey's publisher in London and got invited to go
to Rome where he was living and review with him for a
week what someone who was a master at human
behavior and social contract and the territorial
imperative of people, what that could mean to the
planning of new communities. And as a result of
that time, we became very good friends. And I spent
a lot of time in organizations and with authors who
were mostly in academic situations studying
about people and trying to quantify what it is they
needed to lead successful lives and how that could
impact the physical environment. And for
example, we found that in order to satisfy people,
they come with one pre-wired genetic
propensities, which are just evolutionary in
their character. And second is the cultural
imprinting of the environment they grew up in and
the personal circumstances. And that part, we
didn't have much control about where people were
coming from or whether their parents were good or
bad. There was enough psychiatrists out there and
counselors to work on that. But certainly, we
could understand more about the basic needs of
people. And I came up with some simplistic ways of
defining that for management by SIS. First S stood
for security. All people yearn for security.
People that didn't worry about security aren't
here anymore. So that became an overriding
tendency of people. And you find it in the gated
communities. You find it in just the entrance
statements, which are made to look like a gate.
That says, when I get in there, I'm safe. That's a
subtle appeal to man's innate need for security.
So we've organized the planning in the woodland so
about 75% of all the single-family homes are on
cul-de-sac courts. A single point of entry, a
defensible space. The arithmetic of that group is
such that it reinforces friendliness and a sense
of security that they're not with strangers.
There are friends and acquaintances there.
They're devoid of through traffic, so it's safer
for the kids. That's a whole sense of identity
there, which is also the second point, which is
personal identity. People can be in big cities and
they're lost because they don't have any contact
with their neighbors. You hear about it in New
York. People live in an apartment. In 20 years,
they never said hello to their neighbor in the next
apartment. We wanted to create a situation where
people would feel free to intermingle and
interact. And the arithmetic of the group became
very important. So that's why I recreated that in
the cul-de-sac developments in New Orleans. That
number, not coincidentally, is the same number
that the average hunting primate troop. Is that
right? It existed for two million years and
tramped around this planet. That's the same
arithmetic. Out of that kind of a group, you come up
with five to ten able-bodied men, and the rest are
children and women and older people and whatever.
And that five to ten able-bodied men happens to be
the size of a baseball team and a football team and a
basketball team, where instead of going out on the
hunt with these able-bodied men, they've now got
to organize team sports. to replace that
stimulation, which is an exciting question.
Stimulation. That's great. You can't have a
bedroom community that's dull and monotonous if
you're going to build a new community. So we built
in festivals. No matter where I went and studied
human civilization, back to the early towns in
Mesopotamia 10,000 years ago, they all had
amphitheaters. They all had theater and music.
And we've worked hard. And that's why for the last
10 years I worked hard to convince George that we
needed this music pavilion. And finally got
funded to get the darn thing built. And I was the
project director on that that just opened last
April, which was such a sense of accomplishment
for me after 10 years of working hard on that. And it
builds a niche. People need stimulation. As I
mentioned, the creatures of the forest and these
studies The Woodlands is probably the only place
that I know of in the United States where you can
consistently travel through the forest on
pathways that we've built, the hiking bike trail
system. Presently, over 54 miles of hiking bike
trails in the Woodlands. It's recreating an old
trick. People love it. Post-occupancy
interviewing says, what do you like most about the
Woodlands? The statement comes up first, the
pathways. The walk. They don't know. I'm telling
you, it recreates a pathway through the forest
trip on foot or on bicycle or jogging. Something in
the midbrain is saying, gee, this is the way it
always was. This is great. This is relaxing. This
is natural. And if you're not in a forest, you bring
it into your office or you bring the secretaries
the plants on their desk. I mean, there's an
affinity between man and nature that can't be
denied. The Fares doesn't make people feel
insecure or unsafe. Well, it's the way it's always
been. This company, for example, if you're
president, you get three trees in your office. If
you're senior vice president, you're entitled to
two. If you're state president, you get one. If
you're secretary, you bring your own pots and
plants home and put it on your desk. But that and
flowers, I mean, the evidence is all around us. You
open it up and look, and then you try and reinforce
that. Festivals was the other thing. We have
festivals here, the Harvest Festival, the Fourth
of July Festival, and sports festival events,
like the Houston Open and swimming meets. There's
always something for people to be anticipating.
Sometimes the anticipation is more fun than the
actual event, but you're adding some spice to life
to say, boy, I can't wait until next Saturday
night. So-and-so is going to be at the pavilion, or
we're going to have a golf tournament, or we're
going to have a tennis tournament, or something
else is happening. And that, I think, is what the
marketplace is beginning to respond to. We're not
just building shelter. We've surrounded people
with a quality of life here that they can't find
anywhere else in Houston or probably in the
country. In the few short years we've been here,
we've started to fill in the niches of what is a
maximum opportunity for quality of life? What is
quality of life? It's more than just shelter,
having a nice bathroom, having a nice tile and
countertops in your kitchen. It's what is the
environment in the community. And most real
estate developers, if I start talking to them
about cultural anthropology or social
behavioral science, we'll find another project
where that's a positive ingredient to the
planning process. I would think so, too. That's a
good statement. Yeah, that's brilliant. And that
picture on the wall over there is Robert Ardrey and
I in old Rome. He wrote the African Genesis, the
Social Contract, the Territorial Imperative,
and the Hunting Hypothesis. A giant in his field.
He came before sociobiology by Wilson. And yet all
of those following quote, he was the leader in that
field. He's helped me change my mind about how to
plan communities for people. And the woodlands is
the living example of those theories. which need
to be defined and stated and published. That's a
good statement. And so the SIS, again, to
summarize. Security, identity, stimulation.
And if you have those three, you have the last one,
which I added. SIS came from my debates with
Audrey. That's love. And that's love of self,
family, neighbors, and your community. It's
allegiance. It's what people die for. Allegiance
to a place. When the city of Houston wants to annex
the woodlands, there's going to be a tremendous
outcry because the people have sunk their roots in
here. They have an allegiance to this place. The
territorial imperative of human beings is you
defend your turf. If you didn't defend your turf,
you did not survive because the food scale, food
stock was such that the human primate troops Get up
in the morning, go out, hunt, food gather, come
back to a certain area. That could support your 40
to 50 people. If you let people come and nibble off
your side, there wasn't enough food, you died. So
you defended territory. People put up fences.
They argue about a foot of property. It doesn't
matter. When I used to serve, I said, why are you
worried about this? It's my property. Later, I
learned there's a sense of territory. You didn't
defend it, it meant death. And the people that
didn't defend turf to the death didn't reproduce
to be here. So it's been reinforced, reinforced,
all down through the millennium. And now we're
territorially defensive people. We want to
defend our territory. We were in trouble in the
Middle East. Those people were defended. Sure. We
were in trouble in Vietnam. You cannot send an army
to a foreign place and have them fight anywhere
near the ferocity of somebody if you're on their
land. It's like a puppy dog in your yard. You see
what happens in a football game at the goal line.
When the defenders get their backs to the goal
line, it's amazing how stronger their defense is.
It's a living proof that defense of territory, the
closer you get to your property, the closer you,
the harder you fight to defend it. And the same
thing is here. There's an allegiance to this
place, and I'm telling you, I've known more people
in 15 years, 16 years, because their company sent
them away. They left any number of them, quit their
job for 15 years seniority because they wanted to
come back here with them. My secretary's husband
transferred to San Francisco, 17 years with the
company, big promotion. He said, I'm not going. I
said, you're crazy. He said, I'm not going. You
can't throw that away. I'm not going. He went to
school and studied real estate, started a whole
new career after 17 because he wouldn't leave
here. I mean, it's an amazing example. If you say to
me the theories that I have on S-I-S plus love, L,
they're working. And when I go out and talk to
people in the community and I listen to what they
say back. I don't know if you have. You need to do
this in the classroom. That's a capacity. Well, I
do. You do? Good. I'm an adjunct professor up at
A&M. Good. OK. Where are you from? A&M. Yeah. I
teach in the history department. So I do this to the
College of Architecture once a year to the
graduate division. And I also do the same thing at
the University of Houston School of
Architecture. is talk about community planning
and i try to get them beyond the facade and the
hardware and the design of things right say what
you're really you're trying to build
environments for people if you build a great
environment for people that they aspire to be in to
be part of that will breed success and you'll be
rewarded by the money that you make too many
developers too you know you add up all the numbers
dollars in dollars out and there's a profit So
they're fighting to make these numbers work. And I
just say, OK, the accountants can do that. I'm
going to build an environment that's so good that
people will come. They'll pay anything to buy a
house there, even if it's more than somewhere
else. And then I'll get rewarded because I did a
good job creating that environment. The numbers
will take care of themselves. It doesn't fly when
you talk to accountants, but that's my personal
philosophy. That was sort of my next question,
too, and that is, In your planning and development
of the woodland, basically, you're not
cost-oriented necessarily. You're not, I mean,
you have to be, but at what point does the cost
profit? It's a constant challenge, and it should
be. It should be. It should be. It needs to be. I
mean, you can't go off into wild blue yonder. There
is not a single solitary sub-neighborhood of a
village that we don't plant and do an economic
model on before we hardline the plan. And we
usually do three or four plans. And we try to refine
the environment better and better and better,
watching the infrastructure costs and the
revenue potentials all along the way. And then if
it doesn't have a proper internal rate of return
projected, go back to the drawing board and do it
again. But the first step is planning, then the
cost analysis. Right. And then refinement, if
it's not profitable enough or if we think we can
make it even better. But the two do go hand in hand.
The problem that you have a lot of times is
providing infrastructure. Most of the American
industry now is heavily involved at the
management level with accountants. And they're
so bottom line focused because everybody's
looking for profits. So their stock values go up.
Their earnings go up. And if it doesn't go up every
year, somebody's got to move. And it's a crazy
quest. But nevertheless, it's there. And it's
hard for me to say, you know, this cluster of park
benches are important for this environment. And
they'll say, they isolate things. They'll say,
those benches don't make a profit. That fountain
doesn't make a profit. That sculpture doesn't
make a profit. I keep saying, you've got to think of
the composite balance sheet. The overall, the
reason you're getting the prices for your houses
and the pace that that they're selling is because
people come and they can see the fountain. They can
sit on the bench. They can take a run down the hike
and bike trail through the forest. And those
things, when you add them all in, are part of the
quality of life that's going to make this place
successful, unique. And I told George Mitchell,
when the sun sets on this century, I want the
Woodlands to be the finest community in this
country. And we've got a good shot at it. Give it
another 9, 10 years. So you see an awful lot
happening between now and 2000. I mean, this is
really the big takeoff is right now. Absolutely. I
mean, we've been cranking lots for a long time, and
we'll be cranking them for another 10 or 20 years.
But to bring on the town center and the urban
complex, we need to get a college here. We need to
get a community college, and we need a lot of
things. We need to add to the cultural amenities.
The pavilion's just one. We need an enclosed
theater. We need a sports stadium. Maybe for
international tennis meets. I mean, there's so
many more things that we can add to the menu. We need
to create an urban environment. We need an urban
village where not everybody needs to live on a lot
in the forest. There's early singles, early
marrieds. There's empty nesters. There's
retirees. We'd like to be in a more urban setting
where you can Walk to the stores, and walk to the
cultural events, and not be out having to take care
of a big piece of property. So we need to work
continually to have more variety. To be
successful also in a community, you can't just
have one product in one price range. You need to
say, the marketplace has all of these different
people that we're wishing. Some people want
townhouses. Some want apartments. What price?
Well, some want condominiums. Some want a
mid-rise. And then someone wants single family in
all sorts of sizes and shapes and scales. So if we
can have all those things going and get our
percentage of each one of those, then our volumes
and pace go up. The name of the game is pace, because
the interest clock runs. And that interest money
eats you up if you take too long to get it done. So you
need to keep the pace going.
If things happen as you anticipate, at the year
2000, It'll be pretty well an established entity.
That'll be the woodland. There'll be enough of the
basic infrastructure that the last 20 years, I
think, from 2000 to 2020, those are the
revenue-producing years. The values of those
added things from then on will be just immensely
profitable. Immensely profitable. Is the
reality you see here now pretty well what you would
have anticipated when you came here? Yes. You
really have been on track pretty much. Yeah. I'm
disappointed that the pace was as slow as it was
because we had that terrible depression in Texas
in the mid-'80s, and we had not such a good start
because of things were housing in the early 70s,
too. But I think it's given... Well... We've come
as far as we could with those economic forces,
which, of course, were beyond our control. And
they may come again. The style, the quality that
you anticipated is basically .. Yeah. The way we
envisioned the multi, the wide diversity of
economic housing, which is hard to do. We're
bypassing land now because there was a shortage of
people to build apartments or townhouses. But now
they're filled up, and so now we're going to start
doing apartments again. We've bypassed parcels
so we can infill later when those demands are
there. But I think that we've so far adhered pretty
much to the goals of the master plan, and my
principles are the behavioral response side for
the plan.